                    GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE
                       Version 3, 29 June 2007

 Copyright (C) 2007 Free Software Foundation, Inc. <https://fsf.org/>
 Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies
 of this license document, but changing it is not allowed.

                            Preamble

  The GNU General Public License is a free, copyleft license for
software and other kinds of works.

  The licenses for most software and other practical works are designed
to take away your freedom to share and change the works.  By contrast,
the GNU General Public License is intended to guarantee your freedom to
share and change all versions of a program--to make sure it remains free
software for all its users.  We, the Free Software Foundation, use the
GNU General Public License for most of our software; it applies also to
any other work released this way by its authors.  You can apply it to
your programs, too.

  When we speak of free software, we are referring to freedom, not
price.  Our General Public Licenses are designed to make sure that you
have the freedom to distribute copies of free software (and charge for
them if you wish), that you receive source code or can get it if you
want it, that you can change the software or use pieces of it in new
free programs, and that you know you can do these things.

  To protect your rights, we need to prevent others from denying you
these rights or asking you to surrender the rights.  Therefore, you have
certain responsibilities if you distribute copies of the software, or if
you modify it: responsibilities to respect the freedom of others.

  For example, if you distribute copies of such a program, whether
gratis or for a fee, you must pass on to the recipients the same
freedoms that you received.  You must make sure that they, too, receive
or can get the source code.  And you must show them these terms so they
know their rights.

  Developers that use the GNU GPL protect your rights with two steps:
(1) assert copyright on the software, and (2) offer you this License
giving you legal permission to copy, distribute and/or modify it.

  For the developers' and authors' protection, the GPL clearly explains
that there is no warranty for this free software.  For both users' and
authors' sake, the GPL requires that modified versions be marked as
changed, so that their problems will not be attributed erroneously to
authors of previous versions.

  Some devices are designed to deny users access to install or run
modified versions of the software inside them, although the manufacturer
can do so.  This is fundamentally incompatible with the aim of
protecting users' freedom to change the software.  The systematic
pattern of such abuse occurs in the area of products for individuals to
use, which is precisely where it is most unacceptable.  Therefore, we
have designed this version of the GPL to prohibit the practice for those
products.  If such problems arise substantially in other domains, we
stand ready to extend this provision to those domains in future versions
of the GPL, as needed to protect the freedom of users.

  Finally, every program is threatened constantly by software patents.
States should not allow patents to restrict development and use of
software on general-purpose computers, but in those that do, we wish to
avoid the special danger that patents applied to a free program could
make it effectively proprietary.  To prevent this, the GPL assures that
patents cannot be used to render the program non-free.

  The precise terms and conditions for copying, distribution and
modification follow.

                       TERMS AND CONDITIONS

  0. Definitions.

  "This License" refers to version 3 of the GNU General Public License.

  "Copyright" also means copyright-like laws that apply to other kinds of
works, such as semiconductor masks.

  "The Program" refers to any copyrightable work licensed under this
License.  Each licensee is addressed as "you".  "Licensees" and
"recipients" may be individuals or organizations.

  To "modify" a work means to copy from or adapt all or part of the work
in a fashion requiring copyright permission, other than the making of an
exact copy.  The resulting work is called a "modified version" of the
earlier work or a work "based on" the earlier work.

  A "covered work" means either the unmodified Program or a work based
on the Program.

  To "propagate" a work means to do anything with it that, without
permission, would make you directly or secondarily liable for
infringement under applicable copyright law, except executing it on a
computer or modifying a private copy.  Propagation includes copying,
distribution (with or without modification), making available to the
public, and in some countries other activities as well.

  To "convey" a work means any kind of propagation that enables other
parties to make or receive copies.  Mere interaction with a user through
 a computer network, with no transfer of a copy, is not conveying.

  An interactive user interface displays "Appropriate Legal Notices"
 to the extent that it includes a convenient and prominently visible
 feature that (1) displays an appropriate copyright notice, and (2)
 tells the user that there is no warranty for the work (except to the
 extent that warranties are provided), that licensees may convey the
 work under this License, and how to view a copy of this License.  If
 the interface presents a list of user commands or options, such as a
 menu, a prominent item in the list meets this criterion.

  1. Source Code.

  The "source code" for a work means the preferred form of the work
 for making modifications to it.  "Object code" means any non-source
 form of a work.

  2. Basic Permissions.

  All rights granted under this License are granted for the term of
 copyright on the Program, and are irrevocable provided the stated
 conditions are met.  This License explicitly affirms your unlimited
 permission to run the unmodified Program.  The output from running a
 covered work is covered by this License only if the output, given its
 content, constitutes a covered work.  This License acknowledges your
 rights of fair use or other equivalent, as provided by copyright law.

  You may make, run and propagate covered works that you do not
 convey, without conditions so long as your license otherwise remains
 in force.  You may convey covered works to others for the sole purpose
 of having them make modifications exclusively for you, or provide you
 with facilities for running those works, provided that you comply with
 the terms of this License in conveying all material for which you do
 not control copyright.  Those thus making or running the covered works
 for you must do so exclusively on your behalf, under your direction
 and control, on terms that prohibit them from making any copies of
 your copyrighted material outside their relationship with you.

  Conveying under any other circumstances is permitted solely under
 the conditions stated below.  Sublicensing is not allowed; section 10
 makes it unnecessary.

  3. Protecting Users' Legal Rights From Anti-Circumvention Law.

  No covered work shall be deemed part of an effective technological
 measure under any applicable law fulfilling obligations under article
 11 of the WIPO copyright treaty adopted on 20 December 1996, or
 similar laws prohibiting or restricting circumvention of such
 measures.

  When you convey a covered work, you waive any legal power to forbid
 circumvention of technological measures to the extent such circumvention
 is effected by exercising rights under this License with respect to
 the covered work, and you disclaim any intention to limit operation or
 modification of the work as a means of enforcing, against the work's
 users, your or third parties' legal rights to forbid circumvention of
 technological measures.

  4. Conveying Verbatim Copies.

  You may convey verbatim copies of the Program's source code as you
 receive it, in any medium, provided that you conspicuously and
 appropriately publish on each copy an appropriate copyright notice;
 keep intact all notices stating that this License and any
 non-permissive terms added in accord with section 7 apply to the code;
 keep intact all notices of the absence of any warranty; and give all
 recipients a copy of this License along with the Program.

  You may charge any price or no price for each copy that you convey,
 and you may offer support or warranty protection for a fee.

  5. Conveying Modified Source Versions.

  You may convey a work based on the Program, or the modifications to
 produce it from the Program, in the form of source code under the
 terms of section 4, provided that you also meet all of these conditions:

    a) The work must carry prominent notices stating that you modified
    it, and giving a relevant date.

    b) The work must carry prominent notices stating that it is
    released under this License and any conditions added under section
    7.  This requirement modifies the requirement in section 4 to
    "keep intact all notices".

    c) You must license the entire work, as a whole, under this
    License to anyone who comes into possession of a copy.  This
    License will therefore apply, along with any applicable section 7
    additional terms, to the whole of the work, and all its parts,
    regardless of how they are packaged.  This License gives no
    permission to license the work in any other way, but it does not
    invalidate such permission if you have separately received it.

    d) If the work has interactive user interfaces, each must display
    Appropriate Legal Notices; however, if the Program has interactive
    interfaces that do not display Appropriate Legal Notices, your
    work need not make them do so.

  A compilation of a covered work with other separate and independent
 works, which are not by their nature extensions of the covered work,
 and which are not combined with it such as to form a larger program,
 in or on a volume of a storage or distribution medium, is called an
 "aggregate" if the compilation and its resulting copyright are not
 used to limit the access or legal rights of the compilation's users
 beyond what the individual works permit.  Inclusion of a covered work
 in an aggregate does not cause this License to apply to the other
 parts of the aggregate.

  6. Conveying Non-Source Forms.

  You may convey a covered work in object code form under the terms
 of sections 4 and 5, provided that you also convey the
 machine-readable Corresponding Source under the terms of this License,
 on a durable physical medium customarily used for software interchange,
 for a price no more than your reasonable cost of physically performing
 this conveying of source, or, alternatively, you may arrange to
 provide access to copy from a designated place, and offer equivalent
 access to the Corresponding Source in the same way through the same
 place at no further charge.

  7. Additional Terms.

  "Additional permissions" are terms that supplement the terms of this
 License by making exceptions from one or more of its conditions.
 Additional permissions that are applicable to the entire Program shall
 be treated as though they were included in this License, to the extent
 that they are valid under applicable law.  If additional permissions
 apply only to part of the Program, that part may be used separately
 under those permissions, but the entire Program remains governed by
 this License without regard to the additional permissions.

  When you convey a copy of a covered work, you may at your option
 remove any additional permissions from that copy, or from any part of
 it.  (Additional permissions may be written to require their own
 removal in certain cases when you modify the work.)

  You may place additional permissions on material, added by you to a
 covered work, for which you have or can give appropriate copyright
 permission.

  8. Termination.

  You may not propagate or modify a covered work except as expressly
 provided under this License.  Any attempt otherwise to propagate or
 modify it is void, and will automatically terminate your rights under
 this License (including any patent licenses granted under the third
 paragraph of section 11).

  However, if you cease all violation of this License, then your
 license from a particular copyright holder is reinstated (a)
 provisionally, unless and until the copyright holder explicitly and
 finally terminates your license, and (b) permanently, if the copyright
 holder fails to notify you of the violation by some reasonable means
 prior to 60 days after the cessation.

  Moreover, your license from a particular copyright holder is
 reinstated permanently if the copyright holder notifies you of the
 violation by some reasonable means, this is the first time you have
 received notice of violation of this License (for any work) from that
 copyright holder, and you cure the violation prior to 30 days after
 your receipt of the notice.

  Termination of your rights under this section does not terminate the
 licenses of parties who have received copies or rights from you under
 this License.  If your rights have been terminated and not permanently
 reinstated, you do not qualify to receive new licenses for the same
 material under section 10.

  9. Acceptance Not Required for Having Copies.

  You are not required to accept this License in order to receive or
 run a copy of the Program.  Ancillary propagation of a covered work
 occurring solely as a consequence of using peer-to-peer transmission
 to receive a copy likewise does not require acceptance.  However,
 nothing other than this License grants you permission to propagate or
 modify any covered work.  These actions infringe copyright if you do
 not accept this License.  Therefore, by modifying or propagating a
 covered work, you indicate your acceptance of this License to do so.

  10. Automatic Licensing of Downstream Recipients.

  Each time you convey a covered work, the recipient automatically
 receives a license from the original licensors, to run, modify and
 propagate that work, subject to this License.  You are not responsible
 for enforcing compliance by third parties with this License.

  11. Patents.

  A "contributor" is a copyright holder who authorizes use under this
 License of the Program or a work on which the Program is based.  The
 work thus licensed is called the contributor's "contributor version".

  A contributor's "essential patent claims" are all patent claims
 owned or controlled by the contributor, whether already acquired or
 hereafter acquired, that would be infringed by some manner, permitted
 by this License, of making, using, or selling its contributor version,
 but do not include claims that would be infringed only as a
 consequence of further modification of the contributor version.  For
 purposes of this definition, "control" includes the right to grant
 patent sublicenses in a manner consistent with the requirements of
 this License.

  Each contributor grants you a non-exclusive, worldwide, royalty-free
 patent license under the contributor's essential patent claims, to
 make, use, sell, offer for sale, import and otherwise run, modify and
 propagate the contents of its contributor version.

  12. No Surrender of Others' Freedom.

  If conditions are imposed on you (whether by court order, agreement or
 otherwise) that contradict the conditions of this License, they do not
 excuse you from the conditions of this License.  If you cannot convey
 a covered work so as to satisfy simultaneously your obligations under
 this License and any other pertinent obligations, then as a
 consequence you may not convey it at all.  For example, if you agree
 to terms that obligate you to collect a royalty for further conveying
 from those to whom you convey the Program, the only way you could
 satisfy both those terms and this License would be to refrain entirely
 from conveying the Program.

  13. Use with the GNU Affero General Public License.

  Notwithstanding any other provision of this License, you have
 permission to link or combine any covered work with a work licensed
 under version 3 of the GNU Affero General Public License into a single
 combined work, and to convey the resulting work.  The terms of this
 License will continue to apply to the part which is the covered work,
 but the special requirements of the GNU Affero General Public License,
 section 13, concerning interaction through a network will apply to the
 combination as such.

  14. Revised Versions of this License.

  The Free Software Foundation may publish revised and/or new versions of
 the GNU General Public License from time to time.  Such new versions will
 be similar in spirit to the present version, but may differ in detail to
 address new problems or concerns.

  Each version is given a distinguishing version number.  If the
 Program specifies that a certain numbered version of the GNU General
 Public License "or any later version" applies to it, you have the
 option of following the terms and conditions either of that numbered
 version or of any later version published by the Free Software
 Foundation.  If the Program does not specify a version number of the
 GNU General Public License, you may choose any version ever published
 by the Free Software Foundation.

  15. Disclaimer of Warranty.

  THERE IS NO WARRANTY FOR THE PROGRAM, TO THE EXTENT PERMITTED BY
 APPLICABLE LAW.  EXCEPT WHEN OTHERWISE STATED IN WRITING THE COPYRIGHT
 HOLDERS AND/OR OTHER PARTIES PROVIDE THE PROGRAM "AS IS" WITHOUT WARRANTY
 OF ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO,
 THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
 PURPOSE.  THE ENTIRE RISK AS TO THE QUALITY AND PERFORMANCE OF THE PROGRAM
 IS WITH YOU.  SHOULD THE PROGRAM PROVE DEFECTIVE, YOU ASSUME THE COST OF
 ALL NECESSARY SERVICING, REPAIR OR CORRECTION.

  16. Limitation of Liability.

  IN NO EVENT UNLESS REQUIRED BY APPLICABLE LAW OR AGREED TO IN WRITING
 WILL ANY COPYRIGHT HOLDER, OR ANY OTHER PARTY WHO MODIFIES AND/OR CONVEYS
 THE PROGRAM AS PERMITTED ABOVE, BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR DAMAGES, INCLUDING ANY
 GENERAL, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF THE
 USE OR INABILITY TO USE THE PROGRAM (INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO LOSS OF
 DATA OR DATA BEING RENDERED INACCURATE OR LOSSES SUSTAINED BY YOU OR THIRD
 PARTIES OR A FAILURE OF THE PROGRAM TO OPERATE WITH ANY OTHER PROGRAMS),
 EVEN IF SUCH HOLDER OR OTHER PARTY HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
 SUCH DAMAGES.

  17. Interpretation of Sections 15 and 16.

  If the disclaimer of warranty and limitation of liability provided
 above cannot be given local legal effect according to their terms,
 reviewing courts shall apply local law that most closely approximates
 an absolute waiver of all civil liability in connection with the
 Program, unless a warranty or assumption of liability accompanies a
 copy of the Program in return for a fee.

                     END OF TERMS AND CONDITIONS
